[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The stance of listening,
of listening ever more deeply
to hear how this moment
in life can awaken.
Because every situation
is so multiply
determined that your rational,
analytic mind can't really
know what the hell is
going on, even though we
would love to think we could.
We have gotten so
enamored of the siddhi
of our prefrontal
lobes that we have
forgotten how finite they are.
It's just another power.
And the thing that we
have lacked our trust in
is the wisdom, the
inherent wisdom in us,
the sense in the
heart-mind wisdom,
the intuitive wisdom that
exists as you extricate yourself
from identifying with any
specific thought form.
So that people say to me, why,
when we ask you a question,
are you silent first?
Because what I do is empty to
experience the gestalt of you
asking the question,
the tone of your voice
as you're asking the
question, what history
must have led to
asking the question.
What is my whole history
that has brought me
to an understanding of
what your question is.
What is everybody else's need
in this room about the question.
I've just got to empty
and empty and empty
until all of these forces
are like awash in me,
and they're all just part of
the ocean of my awareness.
And then out of that will
come some response that
is in some way relevant
to what you said,
or irrelevant, depending.
I mean, that's none
of my business.
I just trusted the universe
to come forth with a response.
And it's fun to
start to practice
trusting the universe in
the way you live your life.
It's really fun.
You know, I get more
calls or more things
than I can deal with.
And I don't know
sometimes which one.
And I trust.
I say, I'll do this one,
I won't do that one.
And somebody says, well,
why did you do that?
I say, I don't know.
And it infuriates people.
I don't think you can
use it as a copout,
but you certainly can develop
a deeper and deeper trust
in your intuitive wisdom,
in the wisdom fount that is
pouring forth from inside you.
And that intuitive
wisdom tells you
which fires will burn you
up, because you're still
too attached to somebody-ness,
and which fires will purify.
There are certain
fires that liberate,
certain fires that burn.
And so knowing what
fires you can transmute
and which ones you can't leads
you to define the boundaries.
Not boundaries to push
away God, but boundaries
to acknowledge the stage and
the level of your development.
And there are a lot of
things that I haven't
dealt with in my
life, and maybe I'm
not going to in this lifetime.
And maybe as my love of God and
presence and spaciousness gets
deeper, they will all fall
away and be irrelevant,
and maybe they won't.
But I have to trust what I can
transmute and what I can't.
Because I can feel that certain
things I get into are so thick,
and I get so stuck, that I'm
not yet ready to work with that.
And I really allow the timing.
And I'm not saying, oh my
God, I'm stuck in this.
I'll never-- and I used
to do that all the time.
I used to see all of my neuroses
and all my clingings and stuff
like that as standing
between me and God.
I don't see that now.
I see them as something that may
remain, but the meaning of them
may change, and
they may just turn
into my style being manifest,
rather than my obstacles.
And that'll happen
very gracefully.
It seems to be
happening gracefully.
I invite you to feel that life
is this kind of a process,
so that when you feel
you fell off the path,
you just say, ah,
falling off the path.
More process.
Because where could you go?
Maharaji said, I am always
in communion with you.
God's always there.
You may forget, and it
may be a hell for you,
but the power of
that forgetting will
affect the richness of
the remembering whenever
it happens.
And it will also affect
every subsequent forgetting.
So don't think you
fall off the path.
I think that's a
fraudulent concept.
I just can't buy it.
I don't hear it.
I meet people who tell me they
fell off the path 20 years ago,
and I look into their
hearts, and their hearts
are so beautiful.
And I realize the pain
they've been through
of falling off the
path and how that
has burned into them
a compassion that
is such a payoff.
[MUSIC PLAYING]